BHCS CALIFORNIA OPIOID SETTLEMENTS

CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF

HEALTH CARE SERVICES Allowable Expenditures

On July 21, 2021, California Attorney General Rob Bonta announced the final settlement
agreements with prescription opioid manufacturer Janssen Pharmaceuticals and
pharmaceutical distributors McKesson, Cardinal Health, and AmerisourceBergen (the
Janssen and Distributors, or J&D Settlement). These were the first of several opioid
settlements that will provide substantial funds for the abatement of the opioid
epidemic in California. This document is intended to provide guidance for California's
cities and counties (otherwise known as Participating Subdivisions) that receive funds
from current and future California Opioid settlements.

Allowable expenditures for Participating Subdivisions receiving settlement funds for
opioid remediation must include activities tied to the ending, reduction or lessening the
effects of the opioid epidemic in communities and include prevention, intervention,
harm reduction, treatment, and recovery services. After reviewing the list, if you have
questions about the applicability of your strategy to expend these funds, send questions

to DHCS at OSF@dhcs.ca.gov.

The following information is intended to provide Participating Subdivisions with a list of
allowable expenditures for the California Opioid Settlements funds and includes two
sections:

» Section 1: High Impact Abatement Areas (HIAA)
» Section 2: List of Opioid Remediation Uses - Core Strategies and Approved Uses

‘ Opioid settlement funds in this instance refers to final and proposed agreements between
California and opioid distributors and manufacturers: McKesson, Cardinal Health, and
AmerisourceBergen (collectively, the Distributors); Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Teva; Allergan;
and pharmacies Walmart, Walgreens, and CVS (collectively, the Pharmacies).

April 2023 | 1
Section 1: High Impact Abatement Areas (HIAA)

No less than fifty percent (50%) of the funds received by a California Participating
Subdivision from the Abatement Accounts Fund in each calendar year, will be used for
one or more of the High Impact Abatement Activities shown in Table 1.

Table 1: High Impact Abatement Activities (HIAA)
No. Activity

Provision of matching funds or operating costs for substance use disorder
acilities with an approved project within the Behavioral Health Continuum
Infrastructure Program (BHCIP)

reating new or expanded substance use disorder (SUD) treatment
infrastructure?

Addressing the needs of communities of color and vulnerable populations
(including sheltered and unsheltered homeless populations) that are
disproportionately impacted by SUD

Diversion of people with SUD from the justice system into treatment, including
by providing training and resources to first and early responders (sworn and

non-sworn) and implementing best practices for outreach, diversion and
deflection, employability, restorative justice, and harm reduction

Interventions to prevent drug addiction in vulnerable youth
he purchase of naloxone for distribution and efforts to expand access to
naloxone for opioid overdose reversals.

Section 2: List of Opioid Remediation Uses — Core
Strategies and Approved Uses

Participating Subdivisions shall choose from among the abatement strategies listed
in Schedule B of Exhibit E from the national settlement agreements, which are listed
below in Approved Uses (Schedule B). However, priority should be given to the
following core abatement strategies (“Core Strategies” Schedule A).

2 May include cost overrun for BHCIP programs as needed.
April 2023 | 2
Core Strategies (Schedule A)

A. Naloxone or Other FDA-Approved Drug to Reverse Opioid Overdoses
1. Expand training for first responders, schools, community support
groups and families; and
2. Increase distribution to individuals who are uninsured or whose
insurance does not cover the needed service.

B. Medication-Assisted Treatment (“MAT”) Distribution and Other Opioid-
Related Treatment

1. Increase distribution of MAT to individuals who are uninsured or
whose insurance does not cover the needed service;

2. Provide education to school-based and youth-focused programs
that discourage or prevent misuse;

3. Provide MAT education and awareness training to healthcare
providers, EMTs, law enforcement, and other first responders; and

4. Provide treatment and recovery support services such as residential
and inpatient treatment, intensive outpatient treatment, outpatient
therapy or counseling, and recovery housing that allow or integrate
medication and with other support services.

C. Pregnant and Postpartum Women

1. Expand Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment
("SBIRT") services to non-Medi-Cal eligible or uninsured pregnant
women;

2. Expand comprehensive evidence-based treatment and recovery
services, including MAT, for women with co-occurring Opioid Use
Disorder ("OUD") and other Substance Use Disorder (SUD")/Mental
Health disorders for uninsured individuals for up to 12 months
postpartum; and

3. Provide comprehensive wrap-around services to individuals with
OUD, including housing, transportation, job placement/training, and
childcare.

D. Expanding Treatment for Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome (“NAS”)

1. Expand comprehensive evidence-based and recovery support for
NAS babies;
2. Expand services for better continuum of care with infant-need dyad; and

April 2023 | 3
3. Expand long-term treatment and services for medical monitoring of
NAS babies and their families.

E. Expansion Of Warm Hand-Off Programs and Recovery Services

1. Expand services such as navigators and on-call teams to begin MAT
in hospital emergency departments;

2. Expand warm hand-off services to transition to recovery services;

3. Broaden scope of recovery services to include co-occurring SUD
or mental health conditions;

4. Provide comprehensive wrap-around services to individuals in
recovery, including housing, transportation, job placement/training,
and childcare; and

5. Hire additional social workers or other behavioral health workers
to facilitate expansions above.

F. Treatment for Incarcerated Population
1. Provide evidence-based treatment and recovery support, including
MAT for persons with OUD and co-occurring SUD/MH disorders
within and transitioning out of the criminal justice system; and
2. Increase funding for jails to provide treatment to inmates with OUD.

G. Prevention Programs

1. Funding for media campaigns to prevent opioid use (similar to the
FDA's “Real Cost” campaign to prevent youth from misusing tobacco);

2. Funding for evidence-based prevention programs in schools;

3. Funding for medical provider education and outreach regarding best
prescribing practices for opioids consistent with the 2016 CDC
guidelines, including providers at hospitals (academic detailing);
Funding for community drug disposal programs; and

5. Funding and training for first responders to participate in pre-arrest

diversion programs, post-overdose response teams, or similar
strategies that connect at-risk individuals to behavioral health services
and supports.

H. Expanding Syringe Service Programs
1. Provide comprehensive syringe services programs with more wrap-
around services, including linkage to OUD treatment, access to sterile
syringes and linkage to care and treatment of infectious diseases.

April 2023 | 4
Il. Evidence-Based Data Collection and Research Analyzing the Effectiveness of
the Abatement Strategies Within the State

Approved Uses (Schedule B)

Participating Subdivisions shall choose from among the abatement strategies listed
below which are from the Approved Uses (Schedule B) list in Exhibit E.

Part I: Treatment
A. TREAT OPIOID USE DISORDER (OUD)
Support treatment of Opioid Use Disorder (“OUD”) and any co-occurring
Substance Use Disorder or Mental Health (“SUD/MH") conditions through
evidence-based or evidence-informed programs or strategies that may include,
but are not limited to, those that:

1.

Expand availability of treatment for OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH
conditions, including all forms of Medication-Assisted Treatment (“MAT”)
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

Support and reimburse evidence-based services that adhere to the
American Society of Addiction Medicine ("ASAM") continuum of care for
OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions.

Expand telehealth to increase access to treatment for OUD and any co-
occurring SUD/MH conditions, including MAT, as well as counseling,
psychiatric support, and other treatment and recovery support services.
Improve oversight of Opioid Treatment Programs (“OTPs") to assure
evidence-based or evidence-informed practices such as adequate
methadone dosing and low threshold approaches to treatment.

Support mobile intervention, treatment, and recovery services, offered by

qualified professionals and service providers, such as peer recovery
coaches, for persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions
and for persons who have experienced an opioid overdose.

Provide treatment of trauma for individuals with OUD (e.g., violence,
sexual assault, human trafficking, or adverse childhood experiences) and
family members (e.g., surviving family members after an overdose or
overdose fatality), and training of health care personnel to identify and
address such trauma.

April 2023 | 5
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Support evidence-based withdrawal management services for people
with OUD and any co-occurring mental health conditions.

Provide training on MAT for health care providers, first responders,
students, or other supporting professionals, such as peer recovery
coaches or recovery outreach specialists, including tele-mentoring to
assist community-based providers in rural or underserved areas.
Support workforce development for addiction professionals who work
with persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions.

Offer fellowships for addiction medicine specialists for direct patient care,
instructors, and clinical research for treatments.

Offer scholarships and supports for behavioral health practitioners or
workers involved in addressing OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH or
mental health conditions, including, but not limited to, training,
scholarships, fellowships, loan repayment programs, or other incentives
for providers to work in rural or underserved areas.

Provide funding and training for clinicians to obtain a waiver under the
federal Drug Addiction Treatment Act of 2000 (“DATA 2000") to prescribe
MAT for OUD, and provide technical assistance and professional support
to clinicians who have obtained a DATA 2000 waiver.

Disseminate of web-based training curricula, such as the American
Academy of Addiction Psychiatry’s Provider Clinical Support Service—
Opioids web-based training curriculum and motivational interviewing.
Develop and disseminate new curricula, such as the American Academy
of Addiction Psychiatry's Provider Clinical Support Service for
Medication- Assisted Treatment.

B. SUPPORT PEOPLE IN TREATMENT AND RECOVERY
Support people in recovery from OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions
through evidence-based or evidence-informed programs or strategies that may

include,

1.

but are not limited to, the programs or strategies that:

Provide comprehensive wrap-around services to individuals with OUD
and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions, including housing,
transportation, education, job placement, job training, or childcare.
Provide the full continuum of care of treatment and recovery services for
OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions, including supportive
housing, peer support services and counseling, community navigators,
case management, and connections to community-based services.

April 2023 | 6
10.

1

=

12.

13.

14.
15.

Provide counseling, peer-support, recovery case management and
residential treatment with access to medications for those who need it to
persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions.

Provide access to housing for people with OUD and any co-occurring
SUD/MH conditions, including supportive housing, recovery housing,
housing assistance programs, training for housing providers, or recovery
housing programs that allow or integrate FDA-approved mediation with
other support services.

Provide community support services, including social and legal services,
to assist in deinstitutionalizing persons with OUD and any co-occurring
SUD/MH conditions.

Support or expand peer-recovery centers, which may include support
groups, social events, computer access, or other services for persons with
OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions.

Provide or support transportation to treatment or recovery programs or
services for persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions.
Provide employment training or educational services for persons in
treatment for or recovery from OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH
conditions.

Identify successful recovery programs such as physician, pilot, and
college recovery programs, and provide support and technical assistance
to increase the number and capacity of high-quality programs to help
those in recovery.

Engage non-profits, faith-based communities, and community coalitions
to support people in treatment and recovery and to support family
members in their efforts to support the person with OUD in the family.

. Provide training and development of procedures for government staff to

appropriately interact and provide social and other services to individuals
with or in recovery from OUD, including reducing stigma.

Support stigma reduction efforts regarding treatment and support for
persons with OUD, including reducing the stigma on effective treatment.
Create or support culturally appropriate services and programs for
persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions, including
new Americans.

Create and/or support recovery high schools.

Hire or train behavioral health workers to provide or expand any of the
services or supports listed above.

April 2023 | 7
C. CONNECT PEOPLE WHO NEED HELP TO THE HELP THEY NEED
(CONNECTIONS TO CARE)
Provide connections to care for people who have — or are at risk of developing
— OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions through evidence-based or
evidence-informed programs or strategies that may include, but are not limited
to, those that:

1.

Ensure that health care providers are screening for OUD and other risk
factors and know how to appropriately counsel and treat (or refer if
necessary) a patient for OUD treatment.

Fund SBIRT programs to reduce the transition from use to disorders,
including SBIRT services to pregnant women who are uninsured or not
eligible for Medicaid.

Provide training and long-term implementation of SBIRT in key systems
(health, schools, colleges, criminal justice, and probation), with a focus on
youth and young adults when transition from misuse to opioid disorder is
common.

Purchase automated versions of SBIRT and support ongoing costs of the
technology.

Expand services such as navigators and on-call teams to begin MAT in
hospital emergency departments.

Provide training for emergency room personnel treating opioid overdose
patients on post-discharge planning, including community referrals for
MAT, recovery case management or support services.

Support hospital programs that transition persons with OUD and any co-
occurring SUD/MH conditions, or persons who have experienced an
opioid overdose, into clinically appropriate follow-up care through a
bridge clinic or similar approach.

Support crisis stabilization centers that serve as an alternative to hospital
emergency departments for persons with OUD and any co-occurring
SUD/MH conditions or persons that have experienced an opioid
overdose.

Support the work of Emergency Medical Systems, including peer support
specialists, to connect individuals to treatment or other appropriate
services following an opioid overdose or other opioid-related adverse
event.

April 2023 | 8
10. Provide funding for peer support specialists or recovery coaches in
emergency departments, detox facilities, recovery centers, recovery
housing, or similar settings; offer services, supports, or connections to
care to persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions or to
persons who have experienced an opioid overdose.

11. Expand warm hand-off services to transition to recovery services.

12. Create or support school-based contacts that parents can engage with to
seek immediate treatment services for their child; and support
prevention, intervention, treatment, and recovery programs focused on
young people.

13. Develop and support best practices on addressing OUD in the workplace

14. Support assistance programs for health care providers with OUD.

15. Engage non-profits and the faith community as a system to support
outreach for treatment.

16. Support centralized call centers that provide information and connections
to appropriate services and supports for persons with OUD and any co-
occurring SUD/MH conditions.

D. ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE-INVOLVED PERSONS
Address the needs of persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH
conditions who are involved in, are at risk of becoming involved in, or are
transitioning out of the criminal justice system through evidence-based or
evidence-informed programs or strategies that may include, but are not limited
to, those that:

1. Support pre-arrest or pre-arraignment diversion and deflection strategies
for persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions,
including established strategies such as:

1. Self-referral strategies such as the Angel Programs or the Police
Assisted Addiction Recovery Initiative ("PAARI");

2. Active outreach strategies such as the Drug Abuse Response Team
("DART") model;

3. “Naloxone Plus” strategies, which work to ensure that individuals
who have received naloxone to reverse the effects of an overdose
are then linked to treatment programs or other appropriate
services;

4. Officer prevention strategies, such as the Law Enforcement Assisted
Diversion ("LEAD") model;

April 2023 | 9
5. Officer intervention strategies such as the Leon County, Florida
Adult Civil Citation Network or the Chicago Westside Narcotics
Diversion to Treatment Initiative; or

6. Co-responder and/or alternative responder models to address
OUD-related 911 calls with greater SUD expertise.

2. Support pre-trial services that connect individuals with OUD and any co-
occurring SUD/MH conditions to evidence-informed treatment, including
MAT, and related services.

3. Support treatment and recovery courts that provide evidence-based
options for persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions.

4. Provide evidence-informed treatment, including MAT, recovery support,
harm reduction, or other appropriate services to individuals with OUD
and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions who are incarcerated in jail or
prison.

5. Provide evidence-informed treatment, including MAT, recovery support,
harm reduction, or other appropriate services to individuals with OUD
and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions who are leaving jail or prison
or have recently left jail or prison, are on probation or parole, are under
community corrections supervision, or are in re-entry programs or
facilities.

6. Support critical time interventions ("CTI"), particularly for individuals living
with dual-diagnosis OUD/serious mental illness, and services for
individuals who face immediate risks and service needs and risks upon
release from correctional settings.

7. Provide training on best practices for addressing the needs of criminal
justice-involved persons with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH
conditions to law enforcement, correctional, or judicial personnel or to
providers of treatment, recovery, harm reduction, case management, or
other services offered in connection with any of the strategies described
in this section.

E. ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF PREGNANT OR PARENTING WOMEN AND THEIR
FAMILIES, INCLUDING BABIES WITH NEONATAL ABSTINENCE SYNDROME
Address the needs of pregnant or parenting women with OUD and any co-
occurring SUD/MH conditions, and the needs of their families, including babies
with neonatal abstinence syndrome ("NAS"), through evidence-based or

April 2023 | 10
evidence-informed programs or strategies that may include, but are not limited
to, those that:

1.

10.

Support evidence-based or evidence-informed treatment, including MAT,
recovery services and supports, and prevention services for pregnant
women—or women who could become pregnant—who have OUD and
any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions, and other measures to educate
and provide support to families affected by Neonatal Abstinence
Syndrome.

Expand comprehensive evidence-based treatment and recovery services,
including MAT, for uninsured women with OUD and any co-occurring
SUD/MH conditions for up to 12 months postpartum.

Provide training for obstetricians or other healthcare personnel who work
with pregnant women and their families regarding treatment of OUD and
any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions.

Expand comprehensive evidence-based treatment and recovery support
for NAS babies; expand services for better continuum of care with infant-
need dyad; and expand long-term treatment and services for medical
monitoring of NAS babies and their families.

Provide training to health care providers who work with pregnant or
parenting women on best practices for compliance with federal
requirements that children born with NAS get referred to appropriate
services and receive a plan of safe care.

Provide child and family supports for parenting women with OUD and
any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions.

Provide enhanced family support and child care services for parents with
OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH conditions.

Provide enhanced support for children and family members suffering
trauma as a result of addiction in the family; and offer trauma-informed
behavioral health treatment for adverse childhood events.

Offer home-based wrap-around services to persons with OUD and any
co- occurring SUD/MH conditions, including, but not limited to, parent
skills training.

Provide support for Children’s Services — Fund additional positions and
services, including supportive housing and other residential services,
relating to children being removed from the home and/or placed in
foster care due to custodial opioid use.

April 2023 | 11
Part II: Prevention
F. PREVENT OVER-PRESCRIBING AND ENSURE APPROPRIATE PRESCRIBING
AND DISPENSING OF OPIOIDS
Support efforts to prevent over-prescribing and ensure appropriate prescribing

and dispensing of opioids through evidence-based or evidence-informed

programs or strategies that may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.

Funding medical provider education and outreach regarding best
prescribing practices for opioids consistent with the Guidelines for
Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain from the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, including providers at hospitals (academic
detailing).

. Training for health care providers regarding safe and responsible opioid

prescribing, dosing, and tapering patients off opioids.
Continuing Medical Education (CME) on appropriate prescribing of
opioids.
Providing Support for non-opioid pain treatment alternatives, including
training providers to offer or refer to multi-modal, evidence-informed
treatment of pain.
Supporting enhancements or improvements to Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs (PDMPs), including, but not limited to,
improvements that:

i. Increase the number of prescribers using PDMPs;

ii. Improve point-of-care decision-making by increasing the quantity,
quality, or format of data available to prescribers using PDMPs, by
improving the interface that prescribers use to access PDMP data,
or both; or
iii. Enable states to use PDMP data in support of surveillance or
intervention strategies, including MAT referrals and follow-up for
individuals identified within PDMP data as likely to experience OUD
in a manner that complies with all relevant privacy and security laws
and rules.
Ensuring PDMPs incorporate available overdose/naloxone deployment
data, including the United States Department of Transportation's
Emergency Medical Technician overdose database in a manner that

complies with all relevant privacy and security laws and rules.
Increasing electronic prescribing to prevent diversion or forgery.
Educating dispensers on appropriate opioid dispensing.

April 2023 | 12
G. PREVENT MISUSE OF OPIOIDS
Support efforts to discourage or prevent misuse of opioids through evidence-

based or evidence-informed programs or strategies that may include, but are not
limited to, the following:

1.
2.

10.

11.

12.

Funding media campaigns to prevent opioid misuse.

Corrective advertising or affirmative public education campaigns based
on evidence.

Public education relating to drug disposal.

Drug take-back disposal or destruction programs.

Funding community anti-drug coalitions that engage in drug prevention
efforts.

Supporting community coalitions in implementing evidence-informed
prevention, such as reduced social access and physical access, stigma
reduction—including staffing, educational campaigns, support for people
in treatment or recovery, or training of coalitions in evidence-informed
implementation, including the Strategic Prevention Framework
developed by the U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration ("SAMHSA").

Engaging non-profits and faith-based communities as systems to support
prevention.

Funding evidence-based prevention programs in schools or evidence-
informed school and community education programs and campaigns for
students, families, school employees, school athletic programs, parent-
teacher and student associations, and others.

School-based or youth-focused programs or strategies that have
demonstrated effectiveness in preventing drug misuse and seem likely to
be effective in preventing the uptake and use of opioids.

Create or support community-based education or intervention services
for families, youth, and adolescents at risk for OUD and any co-occurring
SUD/MH conditions.

Support evidence-informed programs or curricula to address mental
health needs of young people who may be at risk of misusing opioids or
other drugs, including emotional modulation and resilience skills.
Support greater access to mental health services and supports for young
people, including services and supports provided by school nurses,
behavioral health workers or other school staff, to address mental health

April 2023 | 13
needs in young people that (when not properly addressed) increase the
risk of opioid or another drug misuse.

H. PREVENT OVERDOSE DEATHS AND OTHER HARMS (HARM REDUCTION)
Support efforts to prevent or reduce overdose deaths or other opioid-related
harms through evidence-based or evidence-informed programs or strategies that
may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.

OND

10.

11.

Increased availability and distribution of naloxone and other drugs that
treat overdoses for first responders, overdose patients, individuals with
OUD and their friends and family members, schools, community
navigators and outreach workers, persons being released from jail or
prison, or other members of the general public.

Public health entities providing free naloxone to anyone in the
community.

Training and education regarding naloxone and other drugs that treat
overdoses for first responders, overdose patients, patients taking opioids,
families, schools, community support groups, and other members of the
general public.

Enabling school nurses and other school staff to respond to opioid
overdoses, and provide them with naloxone, training, and support.
Expanding, improving, or developing data tracking software and
applications for overdoses/naloxone revivals.

Public education relating to emergency responses to overdoses.

Public education relating to immunity and Good Samaritan laws.
Educating first responders regarding the existence and operation of
immunity and Good Samaritan laws.

Syringe service programs and other evidence-informed programs to
reduce harms associated with intravenous drug use, including supplies,
staffing, space, peer support services, referrals to treatment, fentanyl
checking, connections to care, and the full range of harm reduction and
treatment services provided by these programs.

Expanding access to testing and treatment for infectious diseases such as
HIV and Hepatitis C resulting from intravenous opioid use.

Supporting mobile units that offer or provide referrals to harm reduction
services, treatment, recovery supports, health care, or other appropriate
services to persons that use opioids or persons with OUD and any co-
occurring SUD/MH conditions.

April 2023 | 14
12. Providing training in harm reduction strategies to health care providers,

students, peer recovery coaches, recovery outreach specialists, or other
professionals that provide care to persons who use opioids or persons
with OUD and any co- occurring SUD/MH conditions.

13. Supporting screening for fentanyl in routine clinical toxicology testing.

Part Ill: Other Strategies
|. FIRST RESPONDERS
In addition to items in section C, D and H relating to first responders, support the

following:

1.

Education of law enforcement or other first responders regarding
appropriate practices and precautions when dealing with fentanyl or
other drugs.

Provision of wellness and support services for first responders and others
who experience secondary trauma associated with opioid-related
emergency events.

J. LEADERSHIP, PLANNING AND COORDINATION
Support efforts to provide leadership, planning, coordination, facilitations,
training and technical assistance to abate the opioid epidemic through activities,

programs, or strategies that may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.

Statewide, regional, local or community regional planning to identify root
causes of addiction and overdose, goals for reducing harms related to
the opioid epidemic, and areas and populations with the greatest needs
for treatment intervention services, and to support training and technical
assistance and other strategies to abate the opioid epidemic described in
this opioid abatement strategy list.

A dashboard to (a) share reports, recommendations, or plans to spend
opioid settlement funds; (b) to show how opioid settlement funds have
been spent; (c) to report program or strategy outcomes; or (d) to track,
share or visualize key opioid- or health-related indicators and supports as
identified through collaborative statewide, regional, local or community
processes.

Invest in infrastructure or staffing at government or not-for-profit
agencies to support collaborative, cross-system coordination with the
purpose of preventing overprescribing, opioid misuse, or opioid
overdoses, treating those with OUD and any co-occurring SUD/MH

April 2023 | 15
conditions, supporting them in treatment or recovery, connecting them
to care, or implementing other strategies to abate the opioid epidemic
described in this opioid abatement strategy list.

Provide resources to staff government oversight and management of
opioid abatement programs.

K. TRAINING
In addition to the training referred to throughout this document, support training
to abate the opioid epidemic through activities, programs, or strategies that may

include, but are not limited to, those that:

1.

Provide funding for staff training or networking programs and services to
improve the capability of government, community, and not-for-profit
entities to abate the opioid crisis.

2. Support infrastructure and staffing for collaborative cross-system
coordination to prevent opioid misuse, prevent overdoses, and treat
those with OUD and any co- occurring SUD/MH conditions, or implement
other strategies to abate the opioid epidemic described in this opioid
abatement strategy list (e.g., health care, primary care, pharmacies,
PDMPs, etc.).

L. RESEARCH
Support opioid abatement research that may include, but is not limited to, the
following:

1. Monitoring, surveillance, data collection and evaluation of programs and
strategies described in this opioid abatement strategy list.

2. Research non-opioid treatment of chronic pain.

3. Research on improved service delivery for modalities such as SBIRT that
demonstrate promising but mixed results in populations vulnerable to
opioid use disorders.

4. Research on novel harm reduction and prevention efforts such as the
provision of fentanyl test strips.

5. Research on innovative supply-side enforcement efforts such as
improved detection of mail-based delivery of synthetic opioids.

6. Expanded research on swift/certain/fair models to reduce and deter

opioid misuse within criminal justice populations that build upon
promising approaches used to address other substances (e.g., Hawaii
HOPE and Dakota 24/7).

April 2023 | 16
7. Epidemiological surveillance of OUD-related behaviors in critical
populations, including individuals entering the criminal justice system,
including, but not limited to approaches modeled on the Arrestee Drug
Abuse Monitoring ("ADAM") system.

8. Qualitative and quantitative research regarding public health risks and
harm reduction opportunities within illicit drug markets, including surveys
of market participants who sell or distribute illicit opioids.

9. Geospatial analysis of access barriers to MAT and their association with
treatment engagement and treatment outcomes.

April 2023 | 17
