BHCS ALLOcATING OPIOID SETTLEMENT FUNDS

caurornia DepaRTMENTOF = Guiding Principles for Participating Subdivisions

———————

The California Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) is tasked with oversight of
California's opioid settlement funds! and monitoring use and expenditure compliance
by Participating Subdivisions. DHCS has developed this resource to help Participating
Subdivisions consider potential uses of opioid settlement funds and to promote the
uptake of high-impact opioid remediation activities.

Opioid Settlement Funds are for Opioid Remediation
Current national opioid litigation is frequently contrasted against the Tobacco Master
Settlement Agreement (MSA) of the 1990s, an approximately $200-$250 billion
settlement between 46 states and several of the biggest tobacco manufacturers in the
US. Critics of the Tobacco MSA note that while states continue to collect billions of
dollars from the tobacco settlements, only a small fraction of those funds are spent on
smoking prevention and cessation programs.*

The structure of California's opioid settlements is intended to avoid such problems by
requiring Participating Subdivisions receiving opioid settlement funds to spend these
funds on opioid remediation activities. Funds are specifically intended to provide for
remediation of the opioid crisis, and efforts funded through settlement allocations
should be geared toward prevention, treatment, recovery, and/or harm reduction.
Opioid remediation activities include those listed in Exhibit E of the settlement
agreements, and primarily include treatment and prevention, as well as additional

' Opioid settlement funds in this instance refers to final and proposed agreements between
California and opioid distributors and manufacturers: McKesson, Cardinal Health and
AmerisourceBergen (collectively, the Distributors); Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc; Teva; Allergan;
and pharmacies Walmart, Walgreens, and CVS (collectively, the Pharmacies).

2 Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids, January 2023, “A State-by-State Look at the 1998 Tobacco
Settlement 24 Years Later.” Available at https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/what-we-

do/us/statereport/

March 2023 | 1
strategies such as planning, coordination, and research. The settlement agreements
define opioid remediation as “care, treatment, and other programs and expenditures
designed to (1) address the misuse and abuse of opioid products, (2) treat or mitigate
opioid use or related disorders, or (3) mitigate other alleged effects of, including on
those injured as a result of, the opioid epidemic.”

Allowable Activities with Opioid Settlement Funds

Allowable activities can be found in Exhibit E of the settlement agreements. Exhibit E is
broken into Schedule A (Core Strategies) and Schedule B (Approved Uses). Schedule A is
a preferred list of evidence-based strategies that Subdivisions are encouraged to
prioritize. Schedule B is a full list of all approved uses.

Additionally, California set its own list of High Impact Abatement Activities (HIAAs), and
Participating Subdivisions must spend no less than 50% of their funds on HIAAs. Many
activities outlined within Exhibit E can qualify if they focus on one or more of the HIAA.
California's HIAA are listed in Table 1 below.

Table 1: High Impact Abatement Activities (HIAA)
No. Activity

Provision of matching funds or operating costs for substance use disorder

facilities within the Behavioral Health Continuum Infrastructure Program

Creating new or expanded substance use disorder (SUD) treatment
infrastructure

Addressing the needs of communities of color and vulnerable populations
3 | (including sheltered and unsheltered homeless populations) that are
disproportionately impacted by SUD

Diversion of people with SUD from the justice system into treatment, including
by providing training and resources to first and early responders (sworn and
non-sworn) and implementing best practices for outreach, diversion and
deflection, employability, restorative justice, and harm reduction

5 | Interventions to prevent drug addiction in vulnerable youth

The purchase of naloxone for distribution and efforts to expand access to
naloxone for opioid overdose reversals.

DHCS has created an allowable expenses document, which lists all opioid remediation
activities included in Exhibit E, as well as California’s HIAA.

March 2023 | 2

Considerations for allocating opioid settlement funds:

» Ensure 50% of funds are spent on California's High Impact Abatement Activities
(HIAA) and prioritize strategies listed in Schedule A “Core Strategies” of Exhibit E.
Participating Subdivisions should prioritize evidence-based strategies for
prevention, treatment, harm reduction and recovery.

» Use funds to supplement current successful efforts in your community. Rather
than creating new programs or supplanting efforts, look for organizations that
are doing this work already in your jurisdiction. Connect with them to learn about
their needs.

» Have a transparent process for determining where to spend the funds. Include
people with lived experience and individuals working in prevention, treatment,
harm reduction and recovery when planning. Processes may include:?

o Using data to identify areas where additional funds can be most impactful;
refer to existing local strategic plans where possible.

0 Inviting individuals with lived experience to participate in planning
discussions, and/or allocating a set number of seats on planning councils
for individuals with lived experience.

o Seeking out input from a wide variety of groups during planning, including
experts in SUD treatment, organizations working directly with youth and

people who use drugs, opioid focused coalitions, law enforcement
personnel, recovery community organizations, and social service
organizations. In addition, include any city or county departments who
may provide services in accordance with the opioid remediation activities
outlined in Exhibit E and California's HIAA.
« Most of the activities in Exhibit E or California's HIAA pertain to
public health or behavioral health services. California counties have
a local public health department and behavioral health department,
which oversee local services and programs. It is important that
counties include their local public health and behavioral health
agency partners in planning discussions related to opioid
settlement funds.
0 Soliciting and using input from the public to help raise the profile of the
plans and give those community members with unique perspectives the
opportunity to provide feedback.

3 From Johns Hopkins Opioid Principles

March 2023 | 3
Questions to Ask Before Allocating Funds

»

How does this activity contribute to opioid remediation in my community? Is
there a different activity that would meet the goal of opioid remediation more
directly?
Does this activity correspond to a High Impact Abatement Activity since 50% of
funding must be spent on one of these?

Does this activity correspond to one of the Core Strategies in Schedule A of
Exhibit E?
Does this activity supplement current efforts in the community related to
prevention, treatment, recovery, or harm reduction?

Is the strategy evidence-based, and how robust is the research base on the
strategy? One example of a list of evidence-based strategies can be found in this
guide from public health researchers across the county.

Unallowable Uses for Opioid Settlement Funds

Activities that are not allowable under Exhibit E of the settlement agreements include
but are not limited to:

»

Paying the salaries and benefits of individuals not performing opioid remediation
activities;

Covering administrative and indirect costs beyond ten (10) percent of the
Participating Subdivision’s total allocation per year;

Paying for law enforcement activities related to interdiction or criminal
processing;

Paying for non-FDA-approved medications related to the treatment of substance
use disorders (SUD) or mental health conditions;

Paying for medications, medical services, or equipment not related to the
treatment of SUD or mental health conditions (e.g., automated external
defibrillators (AEDs), first aid kits, extrication equipment, gloves);

Developing infrastructure or investing in equipment not directly related to
prevention, treatment, harm reduction or recovery services;

Paying for, investing in, or implementing service activities not included in Exhibit
E or other expenses not directly related to opioid remediation activities.

Questions?

If you are unsure if your planned use of funds is allowable, reach out to DHCS at
OSF@dhcs.ca.gov with a request for technical assistance.

March 2023 | 4
Additional Resources

Nationally Recognized Principles for Use of Opioid Funds

The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, in partnership with the
Bloomberg Overdose Prevention Initiative, developed the Principles for the Use of Funds
from the Opioid Litigation, a set of nationally recognized approaches for planning and
implementation of opioid remediation activities at the local level. These principles
encourage localities to target funds to work that saves lives, implement evidence-based
practices, invest in prevention for youth, focus on racial equity, and develop fair and
transparent processes for deciding where to spend opioid-related funds.

The Johns Hopkins Opioid Principles webpage provides a national perspective on the
use of opioid-related funds, as well as an in-depth overview of these principles. The site
also compiles resources and updates related to harm reduction, state legislation and
activities, and examples of how local entities are spending settlement funds.

Treatment Locators
» SAMHSA Treatment Locator
» Google Recovery Programs Locator

Evidence Based Practice Resources
» SAMHSA Evidence Based Practices Resource Center
» Evidence Based Strategies for the Abatement of Harms from the Opioid Epidemic

California Programs and Resources
» California MAT Website
» Choose Change California Treatment Locator
» California County Departments of Behavioral Health
» California City and County Departments of Public Health
» DHCS Licensed/Certified SUD facilities
» DHCS Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant
o Friday Night Live/Club Live
o Perinatal Set-Aside
o Adolescent and Youth Treatment Program
o Prevention Set-Aside
o SABG Discretionary
» CDPH Syringe Service Program Directory
» CA Bridge: Hospitals with Substance Use Navigator Programs
» California Opioid Coalitions: Local Prevention & Opioid Response Organizations

March 2023 | 5
