Considerations for Allocating
Opioid Settlement Funds

Opioid Settlement
Funds April 2023

Housekeeping

» If you have a technical question, please send a direct message to Audrey
Richardson from Aurrera Health Group.

» Questions can be submitted at any time via the question box in the right-
hand corner of your control panel.

» Today's meeting materials will be available following the webinar.
Webinar Outline

Background on California's Opioid Settlements

Allowable Activities with Opioid Settlement Funds

. Considerations for Allocating Funds

. Unallowable Activities

Q&A
How to Ask Questions

» Type your comments in the questions box located on your GoToWebinar
control panel.

» Today's webinar will provide an opportunity for Q&A. DHCS will focus on
questions that are applicable to all Participating Subdivisions.

» If you have questions about your specific plan for spending J&D funds,
send an email to OSF@dhcs.ca.gov.
Past Webinars & Listening Sessions

» J&D Settlement Allowable Expenses (January 26, 2023)
° Slides
* Recording

» J&D Settlement Reporting Requirements (December 7, 2022)
° Slides
* Recording
Additional Resources

» Opioid Settlement Allowable Expenditures
» Frequently Asked Questions
» DHCS Technical Assistance Request Form

For more information on opioid settlement funds,

visit the DHCS OSF webpage.
California’s Opioid
Settlement Agreements

—KeoeCO
Status of Opioid Settlement Funds

» Settlements with McKesson, Cardinal Health and AmerisourceBergen
(collectively, the Distributors) and Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. were
finalized in April and May 2022. The State of California and Participating
Subdivisions have begun receiving payments.

» Proposed multistate settlements with opioid manufacturers Teva and
Allergan and pharmacies Walmart, Walgreens, and CVS (collectively, the
Pharmacies) are currently pending. The deadline to join these proposed
settlements with Teva, Allergan, and the Pharmacies is April 18, 2023.
California’s Opioid Settlement Agreements

» Today's presentation will cover allowable uses and considerations for
funds from the following final and proposed settlements:

° Janssen Pharmaceuticals ° Teva
° The Distributors ° Allergan
° The Pharmacies

» These settlements follow the same structure within their respective state
subdivision agreements.

» All payments will be made directly to Participating Subdivisions by the
national settlement administrator, BrownGreer PLC.
California
Abatement
Accounts Fund
(70%)

California
Subdivision Fund
(15%)

Settlement Structure

Allocation
Allocated to all
participating cities
and counties.

Allocated to cities
and counties that
were Initial Plaintiff
Subdivisions.

Allowable Uses

Funds must be used for future Opioid
Remediation in one or more of the areas
described in Exhibit E of the J&D
Settlement Agreements.

No less than 50% of the funds received in
each calendar year will be used for one or
more High Impact Abatement Activities.

Funds must be used towards future Opioid
Remediation and to reimburse past
opioid-related expenses, which may
include litigation fees and expenses.

California State
Fund
(15%)

Allocated to the state
of California.

Funds must be used by the State for future
Opioid Remediation.

Opioid Settlements Oversight Entity: DHCS

» The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) is tasked with overseeing
Participating Subdivisions that receive funds from the opioid settlements
with Janssen, the Distributors, Teva, Allergan and the Pharmacies.

» DHCS oversight responsibilities include:
* Monitoring the California Participating Subdivisions for compliance;
* Designating additional high-impact abatement activities;
* Conducting related stakeholder engagement; and

° Preparing annual reports.
»

»

»

Annual Reporting

There is significant public interest in the use of opioid settlement funds:

° Kaiser Health News, March 30, 2023: $50 Billion in Opioid Settlement Cash Is on the
Way. We're Tracking How It’s Spent.

Per the California State Agreements, DHCS will prepare an annual written report
regarding the State's use of funds from the settlements until those funds are fully
expended and for one year thereafter. These reports will be made publicly available on
the DHCS web site.

The DHCS report will include information about spending from the Participating
Subdivisions receiving funds from the CA Abatements Account, including allowable and
unallowable uses of funds.
Allowable Activities with
Opioid Settlement Funds

——KeC—
Big Tobacco
Settlement Lessons

» Critics of the 1990s Tobacco
Master Settlement Agreement
note that while states continue
to collect billions of dollars from
the tobacco settlements, only a
small fraction of those funds are
Spent on smoking prevention
and cessation programs.

i" States that are meeting CDC recommendation on tobacco States that are spending 10% - 24.9% of CDC
prevention programs. recommendation on tobacco prevention programs.
» Re po rt aval la b | e at: States that are spending 50% - 99.9% of CDC States that are spending less than 10% of CDC

htt ps ° / /\WWW to ba ccofree kid S.O rg recommendation on tobacco prevention programs. recommendation on tobacco prevention programs.
/ W hat-we - d Oo / US / state ref Xe) rt. i States that are spending 25% - 49.9% of CDC | States that have allocated no state funds for tobacco

recommendation on tobacco prevention programs. prevention programs.
Opioid Settlement Funds
are for Opioid Remediation

» The settlement agreements define opioid remediation as “care, treatment,
and other programs and expenditures ... designed to:

a) address the misuse and abuse of opioid products,
6) treat or mitigate opioid use or related disorders, and

c) mitigate other alleged effects of, including on those injured as a result
of, the opioid epidemic.”
Exhibit E of the
National Settlement Agreements

» Opioid remediation activities are listed in Exhibit E of the national
settlement agreements.

» Exhibit E is included in all five of the settlements and is broken into
Schedule A (Core Strategies) and Schedule B (Approved Uses). Schedule B
is a longer list of many types of opioid remediation activities, while
Schedule A is a shorter list of core strategies that should be prioritized.

For a list of allowable activities, please refer to the Opioid Settlement Allowable Expenditures.

California’s High Impact
Abatement Activities

» In addition to the opioid remediation activities outlined within Exhibit E,
California has designated a set of five High Impact Abatement Activities
(HIAA).

» No less than fifty percent (50%) of the funds received by a California
Participating Subdivision from the Abatement Accounts Fund in each
calendar year must be used for one or more of the HIAA.

» Many activities outlined within Exhibit E can qualify as HIAA depending on
their focus.
California’s High Impact
Abatement Activities

Activity

Provision of matching funds or operating costs for substance use disorder facilities
with an approved project within the Behavioral Health Continuum Infrastructure
Program (BHCIP)

2 Creating new or expanded substance use disorder (SUD) treatment infrastructure

No
Addressing the needs of communities of color and vulnerable populations (including

sheltered and unsheltered homeless populations) that are disproportionately
impacted by SUD

Diversion of people with SUD from the justice system into treatment, including by
providing training and resources to first and early responders (sworn and non-sworn)
and implementing best practices for outreach, diversion and deflection,
employability, restorative justice, and harm reduction

5 Interventions to prevent drug addiction in vulnerable youth

New HIAA - Naloxone

» DHCS may add to the list of HIAA but may not delete from it. To add new
HIAA, DHCS is required to make reasonable efforts to consult with
Participating Subdivisions.

v

DHCS polled Participating Subdivisions during a webinar on January 26,
2022, on whether to add a new HIAA for the purchase of naloxone. During
the poll, 91% responded in affirmation of this decision.

» The new HIAA language is:

“The purchase of naloxone for distribution and efforts to expand access
to naloxone for opioid overdose reversals.”
Considerations for Allocating
Opioid Settlement Funds

——KeC—
Poll Question

» Has your Subdivision engaged in a community planning
process for the use of opioid settlement funds?

» In the chat, provide any information you'd like to share about
your Subdivision’s process for allocating opioid settlement
funds.
Funding Flexibilities

» Settlement allocations and expenditures will need to be tracked separately
and reported to DHCS during reporting periods.

» Participating Subdivisions may choose to:
° Opt out of direct payments;

° Transfer their payments to another Participating Subdivision; and/or
° Roll over or encumber funds to use later.
Opting Out of Payments

» Participating Subdivisions that are cities can opt out of direct payment of
funds, which sends their allocation to the County in which the city is
located.

» Cities which have opted-out of direct payment do not need to report to
DHCS during reporting periods. Cities who choose not to elect direct
payment must notify the national settlement administrator, BrownGreer
PLC, at least 60 days prior to a payment date.
Transferring to Other
Participating Subdivisions

» Participating Subdivisions may agree to reallocate their shares of the CA
Abatement Accounts Funds among themselves, provided that any direct
distribution may only be to another Participating Subdivision and the
receiving Participating Subdivision must agree to the share being
reallocated to them.

» Such transfers will need to be reported to DHCS during reporting periods,
including the amount of the transfer and the transferring and receiving
Participating Subdivisions.
Rolling Over/Encumbering Funds

» Participating Subdivisions may roll over funds from the previous year
and/or encumber funds for future eligible purchases. Funds must be
expended or encumbered within five (5) years of receipt, or seven (7) years
for capital outlay projects.

» For example, funds received during 2022 must be spent or encumbered
by 2027 (five (5) years) for non-capital outlay projects or 2029 (seven (7)
years) for capital outlay projects. Funds not expended or encumbered
within these timeframes must be returned to the state.
Best Practices for Allocating Funds

» When allocating funds, Participating Subdivisions should consider:

° Investing in evidence-based practices with a focus on those listed in
California's HIAA and the Core Strategies (Schedule A) of Exhibit E.

* Supplementing current successful efforts.

° Creating a transparent process for planning, including engaging people
with lived experience and people working in SUD prevention,
treatment, harm reduction and recovery to understand community
needs.
Prioritize Core Strategies and HIAA

» Prioritize strategies listed in Schedule A “Core Strategies” of Exhibit E.

* Core Strategies can be found in Exhibit E and in the Allowable Expenses
resource.

¢ Johns Hopkins School of Public Health has created a resource with more
information on evidence-based programs that fit within the Core Strategies.

» Ensure that at least 50% of funds are spent on High Impact Abatement Activities.

° Many activities outlined within Exhibit E can qualify as HIAA depending on
their focus.
Evidence-Based Strategies

» There is a substantial body of evidence demonstrating successful
interventions for opioid use disorder. Participating Subdivisions should
use this information to make funding decisions.

* For example, Medications for Opioid Use Disorder (MOUD) are proven to increase
retention in treatment and reduce the risk of overdose. Strategies for treatment
should include organizations or treatment providers that provide or endorse the use
of MOUD.

» Below are resources that can help identify evidence-based strategies:

* Evidence-Based Strategies for the Abatement of Harms from the Opioid Epidemic

¢ SAMHSA Evidence-Based Practices Resource Center
Funding Current Efforts

» Use funds to supplement current efforts in your community. Rather than creating

new programs or supplanting efforts, look for organizations already doing opioid
remediation work in your jurisdiction. Connect with them to learn about their needs.

» Local entities who are likely working on this include:

County Public Health Departments

County Behavioral Health Departments

Harm Reduction Programs/Syringe Service Programs
Local Opioid Coalitions

Local SUD Treatment Providers

Local Hospitals and Clinics
County Public and Behavioral Health

» Connect with your public health and/or behavioral health department and
discuss which current programs can benefit from opioid settlement funds.

* County Behavioral Health Department Directory
* County Public Health Department Directory
County Behavioral Health Programs

» Many counties contract with, or directly provide substance use treatment
through county facilities. Connect with your county behavioral health
department to learn more.

» Opioid settlement funds can bolster county programs that DHCS is
already funding through the Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment
Block Grant. This includes:

¢ Friday Night Live/Club Live
° Perinatal Set-Aside’

¢ Adolescent and Youth Treatment Program
¢ Prevention Set-Aside

° SABG Discretionary

1. Perinatal Set-Aside and Adolescent and Youth Program links provide treatment guide resources
»

»

»

Local Harm Reduction Programs

There are currently 68 authorized syringe services programs (SSPs) statewide that
work directly with people who are currently using drugs and are at greatest risk of
overdose.

To find a local program visit this SSP Directory.

SSPs provide, among other things, the following Exhibit E activities:

* Naloxone distribution and training

° Access to sterile syringes and other harm reduction supplies

° Warm hand-offs to trusted community services, including treatment

Many also provide medication for opioid use disorder (MOUD).
Counties with
Syringe Services

Alameda Sacramento
Butte San Diego H
El Dorado San Francisco Programs (SSPs) in
Fresno San Joaquin California
Humboldt San Luis Obispo
Inyo San Mateo As of October 2022
Kern Santa Barbara
Kings Santa Clara ON
Lake Santa Cruz Spree or als
Lassen Shasta
Los Angeles Sierra
Marin Siskiyou
Mendocino Solano
Mono Sonoma
Monterey Stanislaus
Nevada Ventura
Plumas Yolo
Riverside
For more information about syringe services and other harm reduction programs, see the

California Department of Public Health, Office of AIDS website at https://www.cdph.ca.gow/
programs/cid/doa/pages/oa_prev_needle exchange syringeaspx.

Directory of all SSPs: https://www.cdph.ca gow/ programs/cid/doa/pages/oa prev_sepdirectory.aspx

a
we
»

»

»

»

Local Overdose Safety Coalitions

Over 50 local coalitions provide community outreach, overdose awareness and
education, and naloxone distribution and training for people who use drugs,
adults, youth, parents.

Coalitions provide nuanced approaches in communities to address overdose
prevention, given the diverse makeup of local communities.

Coalitions build strategic, multi-sector community partnerships that including
schools, law enforcement, jails/probation, clinics, treatment centers, harm
reduction, youth organizations, and families/loved ones of people who have died
from overdose.

List of Coalitions and their contacts: Local Opioid Coalitions
Examples of Coalition Projects

Overdose Free Marin Marin

San Benito County Opioid Task Force San Benito

Northern Sierra Opioid Safety Coalition Lassen, Modoc, Plumas,
Sierra

SafeRX Lake County Lake
RxSafe Humboldt Humboldt

San Luis Obispo Opioid Safety Coalition San Luis Obispo

ACCELL Opioid Coalition El Dorado

Sacramento County Opioid Coalition Rx Safe Sacramento
Physicians

Coalition Name county [Project

Inland Empire San Bernardino, Riverside

Overdose Outbreak
Surveillance and Response
Alert System

Let's Talk Booklet - Youth
Crisis Text Line

Call to Action

Let's Talk Project |
SBCOpioidTaskForce

Harm Reduction Vending
Machines — HAVEN Project
Narcan Policy for the Lake
County Office of Education
Increase access to MAT to
youth in Humboldt County
Naloxone Now - SLO

Point of Time survey — needs
assessment

Gone too Soon Memorial
Project
More Local Partners

» SUD navigation programs at local hospitals

* California Bridge provides low barrier access to substance use treatment through
hospital emergency departments.

* Substance Use Navigators (SUNs) work with patients to connect with follow-up
treatment in the community.

* CA Bridge Hospitals
» Treatment organizations

* Choose Change California Treatment Locator
¢ SAMHSA Treatment Locator

* Google Recovery Programs Locator
Have a Transparent Process

Invite individuals with lived experience to participate in planning discussions, and/or
allocate a set number of seats on planning councils for individuals with lived experience.

Seek out input from a wide variety of groups during planning, including experts in SUD
treatment, organizations working directly with youth and people who use drugs, law
enforcement personnel, recovery community organizations, and social service
organizations.

° In addition, include any city or county departments who may provide services in
accordance with the opioid remediation activities outlined in Exhibit E and California's
HIAA.

Solicit input from the public to help raise the profile of the plans and give those
community members with unique perspectives the opportunity to provide feedback.
Considerations for Spending
on Law Enforcement

——KeC—
Exhibit E 8& Law Enforcement

» Exhibit E Law Enforcement Activities fall into the below categories, all of
which must focus on opioid remediation:
° Education/training for first responders related to opioids
° Diversion activities
¢ Warm handoff/overdose response
* Naloxone purchase/distribution
* Treatment within corrections or transitioning into the community
° Drug takeback/disposal

° Wellness for first responders (must be specifically related to opioid
response)
California's HIAA #4

» Diversion of people with SUD from the justice system into treatment,
including by providing training and resources to first and early responders
(sworn and non-sworn) and implementing best practices for outreach,
diversion and deflection, employability, restorative justice, and harm
reduction.
What is Diversion?

» Diversion is a term used to describe intervention approaches that redirect individuals
with a SUD away from formal processing in criminal justice settings and into treatment,
recovery, and/or other support services. Diversion strategies include pre-arrest, pre-
arraignment, and pre-trial activities aimed at directing an individual towards a treatment
or care program as an alternative to imprisonment.

» For more information about diversion programs, visit:
* National Council on Mental Wellbeing: Deflection and Pre-arrest Diversion to Prevent
Opioid Overdose (Tools and Resources)
* AddictionFreeCA.org: Information about Opioid Treatment in California’s Jails and

Drug Courts
Unallowable Law Enforcement Activities

» Search & seizure or testing of illicit substances

» Equipment or personnel costs for gathering evidence for prosecution of
potential criminal activities

» Officer health/wellness services if not specifically geared toward opioid
related harms

» Training unrelated to opioid remediation
Unallowable Uses of Funds

——KeC—
Unallowable Uses of Funds

» Activities that are not allowable include the use of settlement funds to:
* Cover administrative costs that are not reasonable or beyond 10%;

* Pay the salaries and benefits of individuals not performing Opioid Remediation
activities;
* Pay for non-FDA-approved medications, medical services, or services not related to

treatment of SUD or mental health conditions;

* Develop infrastructure or invest in equipment not directly related to prevention,
treatment, or recovery services, or other expenses not directly related to Opioid
Remediation activities.
Questions?

» Please type your questions into the question box in the right-hand corner
of your control panel.
Next Steps on
Opioid Settlements

——uuaeC—S
v

Upcoming Settlement Sign-On Date

Proposed multistate settlements with opioid manufacturers Teva and
Allergan and pharmacies Walmart, Walgreens, and CVS (collectively, the
Pharmacies) are currently pending. The deadline to join these proposed
settlements with Teva, Allergan, and the Pharmacies is April 18, 2023.

If you have questions, check with your local city or county counsel.
Upcoming Webinars

» Planned webinar topics:
° Opioid Settlement Guidance for Participating Subdivisions
* Examples of City and County Opioid Settlement Funded Activities
* Expenditure Reporting Form Training

» If there are topics your Subdivision would like to see discussed, please
submit ideas to the question box or the OSF inbox: OSF@dhcs.ca.gov.
Next Steps

» DHCS will compile feedback and questions provided through this session.

» Technical assistance and guidance documents will be provided to clarify
information related to oversight of the opioid settlements.
For more information on opioid settlement funds,
visit the DHCS OSF webpage.

For additional questions email OSF@dhcs.ca.gov.

PHCS

CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH CARE SERVICES
