Opioid Settlement Funds Readiness Tool

OVERDOSE }
PREVENTION |
NETWORK.

VINYOsIIWS

Funding from opioid settlements presents a critical opportunity to invest in evidence-based programs focused on prevention, treatment, recovery, and harm
reduction. As stewards of this funding, it is important to develop a strategic approach and organized process on how resources will be allocated in your

community to best meet local needs and align with existing efforts.

This tool is designed to help your community develop an organized strategy to maximize local investment and, most importantly, save as many lives as
possible. This includes developing a coordinated and transparent process, connecting to existing programs, identifying necessary partners, and prioritizing

strategies.

Part 1 - Develop a Coordinated and Transparent Process

Settlement funds will be available for at least 18 years. It is essential to build an organized, transparent, and sustainable process for how funds will be

O Review local data: We have looked at our |ocal data using the CDPH
dashboard to prioritize funding towards our highest need communities.
For example, some counties have disproportionate overdose rates within
specific zip codes and among their black and tribal communities. Local
health departments and/or coalitions can provide these analyses, including
data from ODMAP to monitor zip codes with spikes in overdose rates.
Based on the data, these are priorities in terms of location and
demographics:

Priority population/region 1:

Priority population/region 2:

Priority population/region 3:

Establish vision and purpose: We have outlined our overall vision and
purpose for our opioid settlement funds. Articulating a specific vision
statement builds a common focus and commitment among partners. It is
also an opportunity to align opioid settlement funds with other local
initiatives and funding streams dedicated to substance use prevention and
treatment.

1 | © 2023, Public Health Institute.

allocated. Use the checklist below to integrate these planning steps into your process:

O Build partnerships (see part 2): We have a plan for conducting
outreach to local leaders and organizations doing existing work around
substance use prevention, treatment, and recovery to build a cohesive
unding strategy. This includes local coalitions, public health departments,
behavioral health departments, harm reduction organizations, and
addiction treatment providers. As a part of this step, it is important to
acknowledge any potential turf issues and challenges between local

partners and take time to build trust.

O Determine structure for decision-making and communications: We
have established a written process and structure for how opioid settlement
unds will be allocated. This includes documentation of who makes
decisions, how decisions are made, and how those decisions are
communicated externally.

Conduct an “equity check”: We have identified a process to ensure
hat allocation of funds supports local organizations and interventions that
serve those most impacted by addiction and overdose. This includes
directly engaging those with lived and living experience and local leaders
who represent communities of color, including Black, Indigenous and

\._Y HEALTH
LEADERSHIP

& IMPACT

Latinx.

PUBLIC
HEALTH

INSTITUTE®
Part 2 - Connect to Existing Programs and Identify Necessary Partners

It is critical to know what work is already taking place in your community in order to
expand and sustain existing programs instead of reinventing the wheel. It is also
important to take inventory of which local partners have already been engaged or need

to be engaged to take an “all hands-on deck” approach to overdose prevention. Baie! q Gaal
Complete the table below to note which partners (individuals and organizations) you

j j OVERDOSE !5
already have at the table and which ones you still need to be engage. . PREVENTION © = Ch Serger

NETWORK =

Businesses

Health

Organizations and/or individuals AOU SS dn rasa lez
Already g Organizations and/or individuals | representatives from each sector. The

one USER ED SEED PETS you need to engage links below include contacts for each

process county in California.

Behavioral health YON e Behavioral health department
e Behavioral Health Continuum

Infrastructure Program

engaged?

Health care YON e = Clinics and providers that offer
Medication Assisted Treatment (MAT)

e CA Bridge hospitals

Community Y N e Opioid/overdose coalition(s)
e Local leaders representing communities
of color (e.g., Black, Latinx, Tribal)

AR | WPUBLIC
2 | © 2023, Public Health Institute. NP HEALTH
Tribes Y Federally recognized tribal leaders
California Consortium for Urban Indian
Health (CCUIH) and California Rural
Indian Health Board (CRIHB)

Harm reduction Y Harm reduction programs
Organizations that distribute naloxone
(including which ones are utilizing CA’s
free Naloxone Distribution Project).

Local government Y California State Association of Counties

Public health Y Local health department

First responders Y Emergency Medical Services (EMS)

(Law enforcement, Local agencies using ODMAP to monitor

fire, Office of geographic regions of your community

Emergency hat experience spikes in overdose

Services/EMS) First responders (e.g., fire, sheriffs, police,
probation, EMS). (Note: In many regions
of California first responders have
naloxone to administer in an overdose
emergency and/or leave it behind
ollowing response to an overdose.)

Payors Y Local Medi-Cal health plan

Pharmacies Y Local pharmacies

3 | © 2023, Public Health Institute.

es Hee  SHEALTH

& IMPACT INSTITUTE®
Justice (law Y

enforcement, jails)

Jails and drug courts offering addiction
treatment. Some jails also offer naloxone
upon release.

Sheriffs, police, and probation offices.
(Note: In many regions of California, law
enforcement has naloxone to administer
in an overdose emergency and/or leave it
behind following response to an
overdose. Some local law enforcement
are also using ODMAP to monitor areas
with spikes in overdose.

Schools and Y
academia

County Office of Education

Expanded learning/after-school
orograms that work closely with families
Local youth opioid response projects
working on prevention and treatment
Facilities that offer addiction treatment

for youth
Local school-based health clinics

Faith-based Y

Businesses Y

Chamber of Commerce

Housing Y

Organizations working with people
experiencing or at risk of homelessness

4 | © 2023, Public Health Institute.

es Hee  SHEALTH

& IMPACT INSTITUTE®

Part 3 - Prioritize Strategies

California's opioid settlement funding is structured to ensure that participating subdivisions invest in evidence-based strategies that will yield a high impact.
Allowable activities can be found in Exhibit E of the settlement agreements. Exhibit E is broken into Schedule A (Core Strategies) and Schedule B (Approved
Uses). Schedule A is a preferred list of evidence-based strategies that subdivisions are encouraged to prioritize. Schedule B is a full list of all approved uses.
Additionally, California has its own list of High Impact Abatement Activities (HIAAs), and participating subdivisions must spend no less than 50% of their
funds on HIAASs. Be sure to refer to the Guiding Principles for Participating Subdivisions in allocating your opioid settlement funds.

Use the table below to begin planning allocation for high impact abatement activities. This includes using data to justify investment in that activity, work
already being done in the community, and next steps to take.

Work already being done Next steps needed (e.g.,
(names of programs, build partnership with
anizations, and person/organization X)

High Impact Abatement A ity ettenciinacels:

in community

1 | Provision of matching funds or operating costs for
substance use disorder facilities with an approved
project within the Behavioral Health Continuum
Infrastructure Program (BHCIP)

2 | Creating new or expanded substance use disorder
(SUD) treatment infrastructure

3 | Addressing the needs of communities of color and
vulnerable populations (including sheltered and
unsheltered homeless populations) that are
disproportionately impacted by SUD

4 | Diversion of people with SUD from the justice system
into treatment, including by providing training and
resources to first and early responders (sworn and
non-sworn) and implementing best practices for
outreach, diversion and deflection, employability,
restorative justice, and harm reduction

5 | Interventions to prevent drug addiction in vulnerable
youth

6 | The purchase of naloxone for distribution and efforts
to expand access to naloxone for opioid overdose
reversals

AR | WPUBLIC
5 | © 2023, Public Health Institute. LEADERSHIP HEALTH

& IMPACT INSTITUTE®
Addendum - California's State Opioid Response (SOR) Programs

State Opioid Response (SOR) funded programs are already providing services that meet the state’s high impact abatement activities throughout California.
Below are descriptions of SOR programs and suggested high impact abatement activities that relate to each program.

Community-Based Organizations

May support High Impact Abatement Activity #3: Addressing the needs
of communities of color and vulnerable populations (including sheltered

and unsheltered homeless populations) that are disproportionately
impacted by SUD.

Empowering Faith Leaders in California

The Clinton Foundation’s Empowering Faith Leaders in California project
addresses the opioid epidemic through a collaborative learning
opportunity to empower religious leaders from diverse faith traditions to
take on leadership roles in addressing substance use disorders (SUD)
within their communities. Participating leaders are provided information on
the opioid epidemic, SUDs, local supportive resources, speaking about
addiction without stigma, connecting people to treatment and recovery,
and recognizing and responding to an opioid overdose with naloxone.

California Overdose Prevention Network (COPN)

A statewide learning network for coalitions, organizations, and individuals
working at the forefront of the overdose epidemic. COPN’s mission is to
build a movement to strengthen connections within communities and
provide access to knowledge, training, and resources to implement
solutions that save lives.

Find a local coalition.

Tribal and Urban Indian Local Opioid Coalitions

Tribal Local Opioid Coalitions are multisector, interagency partnerships of
community members, stakeholders, and service providers who work
together to reduce and eliminate opioid- and stimulant-related deaths and
other impacts of opioid and stimulant use in Tribal communities.

6 | © 2023, Public Health Institute.

Justice Related Programs

May support High Impact Abatement Activity #4: Diversion of people
with SUD from the justice system into treatment, including by providing
training and resources to first and early responders (sworn and non-sworn)
and implementing best practices for outreach, diversion and deflection,
employability, restorative justice, and harm reduction.

MAT in Jails and Drug Courts

This program focuses on expanding access to at least two forms of MAT in
California's jails and drug courts.

Participating counties: Alameda, Calaveras, Fresno, Imperial, Inyo, Kings,
Lassen, Mariposa, Mendocino, Monterey, Orange, Plumas, Riverside

DUI MAT Integration

This effort includes California Highway Patrol trainings to increase
awareness of drug use and impairment and the creation of linkages
between DUI treatment programs and MAT resources and referrals.

~ PUBLIC
HEALTH

INSTITUTE®

ea HEALTH
LEADERSHIP

& IMPACT
Treatment

May support High Impact Abatement Activity #2: Creating new or
expanded substance use disorder (SUD) treatment infrastructure.

Addiction Treatment Starts Here Equity-Centered Community Learning
Collaborative and Learning Network

The Center for Care Innovation’s Addiction Treatment Starts Here program
includes a learning collaborative and network designed to increase access
to MAT through primary care, behavioral health and community
partnerships.

Counties with awardees: Alameda, El Dorado, Los Angeles, Monterey,
Orange, Sacramento, San Diego, Sonoma, Yolo

CA Bridge Program

The California Bridge Program is developing hospitals and emergency
rooms into primary access points for the treatment of acute symptoms of
substance use disorders (SUDs) - enhancing and increasing access to 24/7
treatment in every community in the state.

Find hospitals in your community with a CA Bridge Site.

California Hub & Spoke System

The California Hub and Spoke System consists of narcotic treatment
program (hubs) and office-based treatment settings (spokes) that provide
ongoing care and treatment. The program aims to increase the number of
providers prescribing buprenorphine for opioid use disorder.

Find a hub and spoke system in your community.

Increasing MAT in State Licensed Facilities

DHCS, with assistance from The Sierra Health Foundation: Center for
Health Program Management (The Center), is providing funding to
California's eligible residential SUD facilities to implement, expand, and/or
improve their MAT services. This funding will assist with costs associated
with recruitment, mentorship, training, and other associated costs to
increase provider knowledge and comfort with providing MAT through a
collaborative learning opportunity for facilities to implement best practices.

7 | © 2023, Public Health Institute.

MAT Access Points

The aim of this project is to support MAT start-up activities and/or
enhancement efforts in settings throughout California, with the goal of
increasing the number of patients with substance-use disorders treated
with medications, counseling, and other recovery services.

Counties with awardees: Alameda, Butte, Contra Costa, Fresno, Humboldt,
Inyo, Kern, Lake, Los Angeles, Mendocino, Mono, Monterey, Nevada,
Orange, Sacramento, San Diego, San Francisco, San Luis Obispo, Santa
Barbara, Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, Sonoma

Public Health/First Responder Collaborations

Through two pilot projects, the California Department of Public Health
(CDPH) partners with public health departments, emergency medical
services (EMS) agencies, and 911 transport providers that engage in opioid
overdose prevention and treatment during EMS calls.

Tribal MAT Project

The Tribal MAT Program aims to improve MAT access for urban and tribal
communities by increasing the total number of waivered prescribers
certified and providing expanded MAT services that incorporate the values
and culture of the communities being served.

Systems of Care

This project aims to strengthen the addiction treatment ecosystems in
California counties and decrease gaps in coordination of patient transitions
moving between higher and lower levels of care.

Counties with awardees: Imperial, Mendocino, San Diego, Santa Barbara,
Santa Cruz, Yolo

PHI CENTER FOR

~ PUBLIC

HEALTH
LEADERSHIP HEALTH
& IMPACT INSTITUTE®
Youth-Focused Naloxone

May support High Impact Abatement Activity #5: Interventions to May support High Impact Abatement Activity #6: The purchase of
prevent drug addiction in vulnerable youth. naloxone for distribution and efforts to expand access to naloxone for

. . we opioid overdose reversals.
California Youth Opioid Response

Naloxone Distribution Project

This program aims to increase access to care through expansion of MAT
services and opioid and stimulant use prevention for youth and families. The Naloxone Distribution Project aims to reduce opioid overdose deaths

; , through the provision of free naloxone in its nasal spray formulation.
Counties with awardees: Alameda, Contra Costa, Fresno, Humboldt,

Imperial, Inyo, Kern, Kings, Los Angeles, Marin, Mendocino, Mono, Apply for naloxone.
Monterey, Nevada, Orange, Placer, Riverside, Sacramento, San Benito, San
Bernardino, San Diego, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Santa Cruz,
Solano, Sonoma, Trinity, Tulare, Yolo

DHCS encourages cities and counties to purchase naloxone directly from
naloxone manufacturers. Many manufacturers offer naloxone at a
discounted price to local governments. Additional information about
Young People in Recovery available naloxone products and manufacturers can be found on the Food
and Drug Administration's website.

Young People in Recovery will launch chapters and life-skills curriculum
programs to youth in recovery from opioid use and substance use
disorders.

Find a chapter in your community.

Youth Peer Mentor Program

The Youth Peer Mentor Program trains justice-involved youth to provide For additional tools and resources on
recovery support to peers with substance use challenges. building effective partnerships and strategies
in overdose prevention, visit the National

Overdose Prevention Network (NOPN)
Resource Library.

nopn.org/library

8 | © 2023, Public Health Institute.

cennenton 4 PUBLI
Cs) HEAT SUNG

& IMPACT INSTITUTE®
