Janssen & Distributors (J&D)
Settlements Allowable
Expenses Webinar

oe

-— ©DHCS January 2023
Housekeeping

» If you have a technical question, please send a direct message
to Mia Nafziger from Aurrera Health Group

» Questions can be submitted at any time via the question box in
the right-hand corner of your control panel

» Today's meeting materials will be available following the
webinar
Webinar Format

DHCS will review allowable expenditures with J&D funds.
During the presentation, DHCS will:

1. Review Exhibit E of the J&D Settlements
2. Review California's High Impact Abatement Activities (HIAA)
3. Review the expenditure reporting timeline

4. Provide opportunities for audience feedback and questions
How to Ask Questions

» Type your comments in the questions box located on your
GoToWebinar control panel.

» Today's webinar will provide an opportunity for Q&A. DHCS will
focus on questions that are applicable to all Participating
Subdivisions.

» If you have questions about your specific plan for spending
J&D funds, send an email to OSF@dhcs.ca.gov
Review of Janssen &
Distributors (J8&D) Settlements

Overview of Opioid Settlement Funds

» Throughout the opioid overdose epidemic, state, local, and tribal
governments have brought lawsuits against pharmaceutical and
drug distribution companies to recover costs associated with the
epidemic and ensure that future crises are prevented.

» On July 21, 2021, announcements were made regarding proposed
settlements worth up to $26 billion with opioid manufacturer
Janssen and three Distributors (McKesson, Cardinal Health and
AmerisourceBergen) to resolve investigations and litigation related
to the companies’ roles related to the opioid crisis.
Overview of Opioid Settlement Funds

» California is expected to receive approximately $2.05 billion from the
J&D Settlement Agreements, which will be paid through 2038. The
majority of funds will be provided to Participating Subdivisions to be
used for opioid abatement activities.

» All Janssen & Distributor payments will be made by the national
settlement administrator, BrownGreer PLC.
OSF Oversight Entity: DHCS

» The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) is tasked with
overseeing Participating Subdivisions that have received funds from
the J&D Settlements.

» DHCS J&D Settlements oversight responsibilities include:

» Monitoring the California Participating Subdivisions for compliance;
» Designating additional high-impact abatement activities;

» Conducting related stakeholder engagement; and

» Preparing annual reports.
J&D Settlements

Allocation Allowable Uses
California Abatement | Allocated to all Funds must be used for future Opioid
Accounts Fund (70%) | participating cities and | Remediation in one or more of the areas
counties. described in Exhibit E of the J&D Settlement
Agreements.
No less than 50% of the funds received in each
calendar year will be used for one or more High
Impact Abatement Activities.
California Subdivision | Allocated to cities and Funds must be used towards future Opioid
Fund counties that were Initial | Remediation and to reimburse past opioid-
(15%) Plaintiff Subdivisions in | related expenses, which may include litigation
the J&D Settlements. fees and expenses.

California State Fund | Allocated to the state of | Funds must be used by the State for future
(15%) California. Opioid Remediation.

Janssen & Distributors
Exhibit E

a
Exhibit E of the National Settlement

Agreements

» Unlike the Big Tobacco settlements of the 1990's, the opioid settlements
outline the allowable use of opioid remediation funds. Opioid remediation
activities are listed in Exhibit E of the Janssen and Distributors settlements.

» Exhibit E is included in both the Janssen and Distributor settlements and is
broken into Schedule A (Core Strategies) and Schedule B (Approved Uses).
Schedule B is a longer list of many types of opioid remediation activities,
while Schedule A is a shorter list of core strategies that should be
prioritized.

For a list of allowable activities, please refer to the J&D Settlement Allowable Expenditures. 11
Schedule A: Core Strategies

»

»

»

»

»

»

»

»

»

Naloxone or Other FDA-Approved Drug to Reverse Opioid Overdoses
Medication-Assisted Treatment (MAT) Distribution and Other Opioid-Related Treatment
Pregnant and Postpartum Women

Expanding Treatment for Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome (NAS)

Expansion Of Warm Hand-Off Programs and Recovery Services

Treatment for Incarcerated Population

Prevention Programs

Expanding Syringe Service Programs

Evidence-Based Data Collection and Research Analyzing the Effectiveness of the
Abatement Strategies Within the State
California's High Impact
Abatement Activities

High Impact Abatement Activities

» In addition to the opioid remediation activities outlined within the
settlement agreements, California has designated a set of five High Impact
Abatement Activities (HIAA).

» No less than fifty percent (50%) of the funds received by a California
Participating Subdivision from the Abatement Accounts Fund in each
calendar year will be used for one or more of the HIAA.

» Many activities outlined within Exhibit E can qualify as HIAA depending on
their focus.
High Impact Abatement Activities

No. Activity

Provision of matching funds or operating costs for substance use disorder facilities
with an approved project within the Behavioral Health Continuum Infrastructure
Program (BHCIP)

2 Creating new or expanded substance use disorder (SUD) treatment infrastructure

Addressing the needs of communities of color and vulnerable populations (including

sheltered and unsheltered homeless populations) that are disproportionately impacted
by SUD

Diversion of people with SUD from the justice system into treatment, including by
providing training and resources to first and early responders (sworn and non-sworn)
and implementing best practices for outreach, diversion and deflection, employability,
restorative justice, and harm reduction

HIAA #1: Behavioral Health Continuum
Infrastructure Program

>

Vv

DHCS was authorized through 2021 legislation to establish the Behavioral Health
Continuum Infrastructure Program (BHCIP) with $2.2 billion to construct, acquire,

and rehabilitate real estate assets or to invest in needed mobile crisis
infrastructure to expand the community continuum of behavioral health
treatment resources.

>

Vv

DHCS is releasing BHCIP grant funds through six rounds that target various gaps
in the state’s behavioral health facility infrastructure. The BHCIP data dashboard
with more information about how funding has been used can be accessed here.

>

Vv

Cities and counties can use OSF dollars for matching funds or operating costs for
substance use disorder facilities with an approved BHCIP project.
BHCIP Funding Rounds 1-3

» Round 1: Crisis Care Mobile Units (CCMU) Program Grant
» Provides funding for California county, city, or tribal entity behavioral
health authorities to implement new and enhanced CCMUs
» Round 2: Behavioral Health County and Tribal Planning Grant

» Provides an opportunity for counties and tribal entities to expand
planning efforts in their communities or regions for the acquisition and
expansion of behavioral health infrastructure statewide.

» Round 3: Launch Ready Grant

» Supports preparation activities to plan for the acquisition and
expansion of behavioral health infrastructure throughout the state.
BHCIP Funding Rounds 4-6

» Round 4: Children and Youth
» Expands the behavioral health continuum of treatment and service
resources in settings that serve Californians ages 25 and younger,
including pregnant and postpartum women and their children, and
transition-age youth, along with their families.

» Round 5: Crisis and Behavioral Health Continuum

» Addresses significant crisis care gaps in California's behavioral health
(mental health and substance use disorder) infrastructure, with
consideration for funding priority to those that provide crisis services to
individuals in need.

» Round 6: Outstanding Needs Remaining After Rounds 3 Through 5
Modifying HIAA to Add
Naloxone

DHCS Authority to Modify HIAA

» DHCS can add HIAA but not remove HIAA. The California J&D State-
Subdivision Agreements state:

» “The California Department of Health Care Services ("DHCS"”) may add
to this list (but not delete from it) by designating additional High
Impact Abatement Activities. DHCS will make reasonable efforts to
consult with stakeholders, including the CA Participating Subdivisions,
before adding additional High Impact Abatement Activities to this list.”

» DHCS would like your input on whether to add purchasing naloxone to
California's HIAA.

20
What is Naloxone?

» Naloxone is a life-saving medication that reverses an opioid
overdose. It works by blocking the opioid receptor sites and
reversing the toxic effects of an overdose. It can be administered by
intranasal spray, intramuscular (into the muscle), subcutaneous
(under the skin), or by intravenous injection.

» There is little to no effect on an individual if opioids are not present
in their system. Naloxone has few known adverse effects and no
potential for abuse.
Why is Naloxone Important?

» Opioid overdoses are on the rise, and fentanyl is increasingly involved.

» Fentanyl is a synthetic opioid that is up to 50 times stronger than
heroin

» There were 7,175 opioid-related overdose deaths in California in 2021;
5,961 (or 83%) of these deaths were related to fentany!

» By comparison, 48% of opioid overdose deaths in 2019 were fentanyl
related

» Having naloxone available when encountering a suspected overdose can
save a life.
Poll Question

» Should purchasing naloxone be added to California's High

Impact Abatement Activities?

» A yes vote means: | support adding naloxone to the list of California's
HIAA. This means that Participating Subdivisions would be able to
spend up to 100% of their J&D allocation on purchasing naloxone.

» Ano vote means: | do not support adding naloxone to the list of
California's HIAA. This means that Participating Subdivisions would only
be able to spend up to 50% of their J&D allocation on purchasing
naloxone.
Audience Response Question

» Do you have concerns about adding naloxone to
California's High Impact Abatement Activities?

» Please type your response in the question box.
Considerations & Resources

a
Considerations for Use of J&.D Funds

»

Vv

Prioritize California's HIAA and strategies listed in Schedule A “Core Strategies” of Exhibit
E. Participating Subdivisions should prioritize evidence-based strategies for prevention,
treatment, harm reduction and recovery.

» Use funds to supplement current efforts in your community. Rather than creating new
programs or supplanting efforts, look for organizations that are already doing this work
in your jurisdiction. Connect with them to learn about their needs.

» Include people with lived experience and individuals working in the community when
planning for use of the funds.

» If you have questions about the use of funds, reach out to DHCS at OSF@dhcs.ca.gov
with a request for technical assistance.
Resources for Use of J&D Funds

» DHCS Licensed/Certified SUD facilities
» Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block Grant

» Friday Night Live/Club Live

» Perinatal Set-Aside

» Adolescent and Youth Treatment Program

» Prevention Set-Aside
» SABG Discretionary
» SAMHSA Treatment Locator

» Johns Hopkins’ Principles for the Use of Funds from the Opioid
Litigation
Feedback from Participating
Subdivisions

» DHCS received feedback from Participating Subdivisions during
and after the December 2022 Listening Session requesting
DHCS to review planned local opioid settlement expenditures.

» According to the settlements, DHCS is not required to approve
planned expenditures; however, DHCS is willing to provide
feedback for interested Participating Subdivisions.
Poll Question

» Would your Subdivision like the opportunity to submit
spending plans for DHCS review and feedback?
» A yes vote means: Your Subdivision would like the

opportunity (but would not be required) to submit a
spending plan to DHCS for review and feedback.

» A no vote means: Your Subdivision would not be interested in
submitting a spending plan to DHCS for review and
feedback.
Expenditure Reporting Review

a
Feedback from Previous Listening Session
on J&D Reporting Requirements

» Slides and recording from the previous December 7* Listening
Session on J&D Reporting Requirements are available on the
DHCS OSF webpage.

» After receiving feedback in support of extending the reporting
deadline, DHCS has changed the reporting deadline from
August 315t to September 30°.
Expenditure Reporting

» DHCS is working to develop an online data portal for prospective and
retrospective expenditure reporting. Participating Subdivisions will be
required to enter the data into the online portal once a year.

» The online data portal will be available to Participating Subdivisions prior to
the first reporting period. Training on how to utilize the online data portal
will be available prior to the reporting date.

» The reporting will provide DHCS with the information needed for the
required annual report in addition to the monitoring and compliance
requirements.

32
Expenditure Reporting Timeline

Month/Year Milestone

November 2022 First payments to Subdivisions

Sept 29, 2023 *Expenditure reports for SFY 2022-2023 due
*Planned expenditures for SFY 2023-24 due
Sept 30, 2024 *Expenditure reports for SFY 2023-2024 due
*Planned expenditures for SFY 2024-25 due

State Fiscal Year (SFY) runs from July 1st - June 30" every year.

Janssen & Distributor payments are expected to be made to Subdivisions annually in June and July, respectively,
starting in 2023.

All Janssen & Distributor payments will be made by the national settlement administrator, BrownGreer PLC. 33

Expenditure Reporting

» Participating Subdivisions will be required to report:

» Amount of settlement funds received and expenditures for the prior
State Fiscal Year (SFY) — individually by Janssen Settlement Funds and
Distributors Settlement Funds and by fund type (e.g., Abatement
Accounts Fund, Subdivision Fund)

» A brief descriptions of funded activities

» Corresponding to Exhibit E of the National Settlement Agreements and California’s HIAA

» Interest earned on settlement funds

» Transfers to/from other Subdivisions

» Legal expenses, if the subdivision is both a Plaintiff Subdivision and an

Initial Participating Subdivision
34
Failure to Report

» Participating Subdivisions who do not submit their reports by
the prescribed deadlines will receive an electronic notice via
email from a member of the DHCS oversight team regarding
the missing report.*

» Recurring failure to submit a timely report may result in a meet
and confer with DHCS, an audit, or legal action.

*It is under the responsibility of the Participating Subdivision to ensure their primary contact’s information is correctly listed
with DHCS. 35
Misspent Funds

» If DHCS determines that a CA Participating Subdivision’s use of CA
Abatement Accounts Funds is inconsistent with the J&D provisions,
the parties shall meet and confer in an effort to resolve the
concern.

» If the parties are unable to reach a resolution, DHCS may conduct
an audit of the Subdivision’'s use of the CA Abatement Accounts
Funds

» If the concern still cannot be resolved, the State may bring a
motion or action in the court
Q&A

Questions?

» Please type your questions into the question box in the right-
hand corner of your control panel.
Next Steps on
Janssen & Distributors
Settlements

Upcoming Webinars

» Spring 2023
» Considerations for Allocating J&D Funds
» Preview of J&D Expenditure Reporting Form

» Summer 2023:
» Examples of City and County J&D Funded Activities
» Expenditure Reporting Form Training

» If there are topics your Subdivision would like to see discussed, please
submit ideas to the question box or the OSF inbox: OSF@dhcs.ca.gov.
Next Steps

» DHCS will compile feedback and questions provided through
this session.

» Technical assistance and guidance documents will be provided
to clarify information related to oversight of the J&D
Settlements.

41
Resources & Additional Feedback

For more information on opioid settlement funds,
visit the DHCS OSF webpage.

For additional questions email OSF@dhcs.ca.gov.

42
